And as you might have guessed, this tool is a key. Keys are really useful in situations like this.
So typically when you have a list and in a list, you have stateful widgets.
Now unfortunately, there currently is a bug with ListView.builder where even with a key, you can't fix this
issue.
So for the moment, for this video here, I'll actually change this here from ListView.builder which of
course has the advantage of being very good for very long lists,
I'll change this to a ListView with the children property and delete that part down there.
We're now in children, of course I want to map my list of transactions into a list of transaction items
and that's something we also did earlier already.
We take our transactions and there, we call map.
We pass a function to map where we get access to every single transaction and for every transaction
which is just a data object, we return a new transaction item widget to which we pass tx as a
value for the transaction. Now we also have to call to list on this to turn this into a real list
and now children needs a list of widgets, not a list of lists,
so either we add the spread operator here or since there are no other elements in that children list,
we simply remove these square brackets and assign our new list of widgets we generate here as a value
to children in the ListView.
So this still gives us a list of transactions
but now in a way where we have no bug in Flutter so that I can show what keys do for us.
Now we need that key argument on our custom item, so now we need to accept a key here in the constructor
of our own widget and every widget that's built into Flutter also has such a key, like here the card.
On that card,
we could set a key if that would be our root level widget in our ListView
but in our ListView here, the root level widget for each item is our custom transaction item widget
and therefore we need to add a key to our custom transaction item and therefore, we need to accept a
key argument.
So you really only need to accept that when your own widget needs to have a key and you only need to
have a key on your widget
if it's the topmost item, a stateful widget and the topmost item in a list or in situations where
you have this strange behavior that you get the wrong state attached to your element.
So here, we then set the key argument and now set it to what? Flutter has a couple of built-in keys and
attached, you find a video that also explains that key idea and different kinds of keys.
One key you could use is the unique key here. The unique key class here is built into Flutter and it
automatically creates a unique key for every item,
so every new item gets its own unique key attached.
We pass this here to key and now this part here comes into play, in our transaction item after the
constructor, this :super thing. You learned that super refers to the parent class. By calling super
like a function, you're instantiating the parent class.
Now normally you don't need to do that because Flutter does it for you automatically.
You only need to do it on your own if you want to pass some extra data to the parent class
and typically that one piece of data you might want to pass to your parent class which always is stateful
or stateless widget for your own widget classes is a possible key you're accepting because that
keying functionality is of course managed by Flutter behind the scenes.
So if you get a key on your widget, you need to forward it to the Flutter base widget so that Flutter knows
what to do with that key, your widget alone doesn't do anything with that argument, right?
We're not using that argument anywhere in our class here,
so we need to forward this to the parent widget.
Now what's this strange syntax?
It's just a a short notation Dart offers for calling the super constructor,
it's called a constructor initializer list.
We need to be honest rarely need it for our own classes here,
if you want to learn more about it, you find a link attached where you can learn more about initializer
lists.
In short, here it also allows you to initialize the parent widget or the parent class by calling its
constructor and forwarding data to the parent class
and here as I said, we need to forward the key, so that Flutter knows what to do with the key.
Long story short, with all of that, we forward the key, we accept the key and we set a key here on our
transaction item and we need to set the key here and not on the card in our transaction item or on the
ListTile in our transaction item because you need to add the key on the direct child of your ListView
or of your list you're creating.
So not at some nested widget but the topmost widget you have in your list of elements and that is our
transaction item widget and therefore here, we set the key.
Now let's refresh the app and let's see if that fixes the issue.
If we go back and we add a new transaction here,
Test, 11, for today it has a blue background and
then we add Test2, 22,
maybe on that day,
also has a blue background and add Test3 and you can already see something in the background here.
These colors are randomly changing,
basically whenever the state of her application changes and the reason for that is that this unique key
is indeed added to every list item and is truly unique
but of course this is just the constructor of a class and therefore this is called whenever our ListView
updates and that happens whenever set state is called and when our build method reruns. So unique key
is not really that great
if this rebuilds constantly because then with every rebuild of the entire list, even if nothing inside
of the list changes but the parent widget changed,
you get a new unique key assigned and therefore, Flutter is not able to match up the items and it loses
your data.
So instead, you should use a value key, that is a key where you pass your own identifier and that of course
should be a value that is unique to every list item you have.
Now here for our transactions, we have an ID and therefore, the ID is the perfect key here.
So we use tx.id here as a value key and now with that if we refresh this, you will see that this
now will work correctly.
If I now start adding a transaction again
for today let's say and I
then add another transaction,
now you can already see it's not changing in the background all the time
and now we have different colors here
and now if I delete the first one,
so the red one, of course we should only have Test2 with a black background
and indeed that's what's happening.
So now, the key fixed it for us
and how is that now working?
If I go back to drawing here,
this works because we have our widget tree and we have our element tree
and you learned, there we have the ListView with the list items and in the element tree, we have our
elements that belong to these widgets, right,
like this.
Now you learned that identification happens because this knows about the type of widget and this knows about the
type of its connected widget and this element knows about the type and the elements also know about
each other.
And of course our widgets have certain types,
this is the ListView,
this is the item and this is the item but as you learned, matching by item only is not enough because we
have similar types here in the list and hence when we removed one item, matching by type only led to
a problem.
Now with a key added to the list item here,
this key is also stored as an identification criteria.
So if the first item has an ID of 1 and the second item here has an ID of 2, then this key is also
stored in the element.
So besides checking for the type, this now also knows that the first item here, the first element here,
belongs to a widget which is of type item and has an ID of 1
and that's true for this widget but not for the second widget. Hence
now if the first widget gets removed and of course keep in mind that our state here is also attached
to our elements.
If that first widget gets removed, now Flutter when it checks the element tree finds out that this element
here has no matching widget anymore because yes, it does find another widget which is of type item
but not with a key of 1,
this has a key of 2 and therefore Flutter goes ahead and destroys this element in this state and
does not try to reattach this state to this widget.
This does not happen because we now have a key as an additional identification criteria,
this is what keys do,
they simply make it easier for Flutter to identify the connected widget.
Now you should really only use keys when you need them though,
don't start using them everywhere on every widget because Flutter by default doesn't need them.
The default mechanism of identifying what type works perfect in 99% of all use cases,
it's really mostly that ListView with stateful children scenario where you need keys.
If we had a transaction item as a stateless widget as we had at the beginning, we also had no problem,
we only have a problem if it's a stateful widget that manages its own data internally and that data
can change of course and then Flutter might end up in a situation where it can't match up items correctly
and attaches state incorrectly and that is when you need a key and definitely use a value key with your
own custom identifier instead of an automatically calculated unique key which has problems when your
list is rebuilt because then new unique keys are calculated as well and therefore matching up doesn't
work anymore because the keys are not found,
you have new keys for the next build method run.